Well, we are lucky enough to have Dr.
Thomas Seyfried with us today. Um, thank
you so much for for coming on. Oh, thank
you very much. It's a nice It's a
pleasure to be here.
Good. I'm glad I'm glad pleasure's ours.
Um, I'd like to start with the rarity of
cancer. Um,
of course in human history cancer has
been a rare disease.
Can you speak to how cancer previously
was a rare thing in the human world and
in the animal kingdom?
Yeah, well, you know, um,
uh,
Tim Noakes has a book out uh, that looks
at looked at cancer in Wales.
Um, uh,
which is part of the UK, of course.
Uh, but in the 1800s,
uh,
in the in Wales, cancer was not not a
prominent disorder. More of it was lung
lung involvement, I think, from the coal
industry and infections and and this
kind of thing.
And then they reevaluated the population
in the 1990s, I believe,
late '90s, and cancer had moved into one
of the top spots.
So, clearly in about 100 years, uh,
we
uh, the the the disorder in that in that
population group
uh, increased significantly.
Um,
the humanitarian uh, physician Albert
Schweitzer
uh, also looked at African populations
uh, for cancer uh, back in the early
1900s, and um, he saw he was surprised
to see such a low low incidence of
cancer. As a matter of fact, he looked
at thousands and examined He He was a
physician examining people for cancer,
and they didn't have cancer.
They had other things, infections and
other kinds of ailments. He was out,
this is really remarkable.
And the English explorers, I think, in
uh, in the Inuit population in Canada,
also remarked about how infrequent uh,
cancer was
uh, in these populations.
Um, you know, I I visited the uh,
Thunder Bay Medical School some years
ago, uh, which is part of Canada, and
they and they service
uh, the Inuits
uh, of their country now.
And cancer was like one of the major
disorders, along with diabetes, heart
disease, cardiovascular the dementia,
the whole the whole list of chronic
diseases.
So, so clearly uh, we see uh, a rise in
cancer that's clearly associated with
the uh, Western civilization diet
lifestyle. As soon as that enters your
population,
uh, brace yourself for a barrage of
chronic diseases
uh, that come predominantly with uh,
food, lack of exercise, um, and I'm not
discounting
uh, increases in chemicals uh, in in in
in the food uh, and air that we breathe.
I I think all of this comes together
and some people get cancer, some people
get cardiovascular disease, some people
get diabetes, and there's an overlap
overlap, there's an obesity epidemic.
Um,
and when you look at animals,
um,
in the wild, one of my students uh,
looked at the wolf uh,
why wolves, you know, wolves die
predominantly from injuries and
infections. I I think this is in in in
the wild. And domestic dogs, cancer is
the number one killer of domestic dogs.
All dogs evolved uh, were selected from
the genome of the wolf.
And uh, their num their and they're
eating the same crap food, no exercise
uh, that the rest of us are eating. Um,
you know, so when I if we go back, we
have no medical records from our
Paleolithic ancestry, which would be
anywhere from 50 to 100 200,000 years
ago. Our our ancestors were
hunter-gatherers. So,
what would be killing most of those
folks would be what was killing most of
the animals in the wild, which would be
injuries and infections.
So, their life expectancy would be lower
because they didn't have antibiotics,
and they didn't have orthopedic surgeons
to fix their fix their broken bones.
Uh, today we have a whole array of
vaccines and antibiotics and things like
this, and we have uh, large numbers of
highly skilled orthopedic surgeons that
can fix broken bones and hips and all
the kinds of things that would have
debilitated us
uh, in the old days. But what's killing
us now
are chronic diseases and uh, cancer
being uh, number one, one of the one of
the top ones. So, it's it's not a
mystery uh, what's going on here. Uh,
it's our diet and lifestyle that's
putting us at risk for all these chronic
diseases. And I And I think it's
surprising to me
how little understanding
uh, most folks have
uh, of these concepts. Scientific
illiteracy is rampant in our societies.
They have very little understanding of
anything. I mean, I can't believe how
many people still think uh,
that the sun revolves around the earth.
I I I It's like, what the hell, man? Do
you guys not know? They have no clue
about biological evolution.
Uh, I mean, it's just like, wow. And
then we're wondering, oh, why are you
getting cancer? It's It's not a mystery.
We have a poorly educated uh,
scientifically illiterate population.
Mhm. Um, I think so, it's it's not a
surprise.
I think there's a there's a parallel
between education and health of the
consensus view is it's outsourced. My
health is outsourced to my doctor, I
don't need to think about it. My
education is outsourced to my school and
university, I don't need to think about
it. And I think that holds back um,
holds back progress. With with the diet
and lifestyle piece, and you know, if
these problems are exacerbated by poor
diet and lifestyle, what is it about
poor diet and lifestyle that then leads
to cancer?
Okay, so what we know is we have to
understand what causes cancer. What is
What is the origin of dysregulated cell
growth? That's That brings us back
to understanding why diet and lifestyle
are linked to the origin of cancer and
and other uh, chronic diseases.
Uh, we can speak specifically
uh, about cancer.
Uh, all cancers that we have studied,
all major cancers, which represent over
97%,
maybe even more,
um,
are are are using uh,
energy without oxygen.
So, uh, this comes from a chronic
disruption
of oxidative phosphorylation in the
mitochondria of of of cells. Now,
le- let me break it down just a little
bit more for you.
Um, you know, as I said, Warburg first
described that uh, what what we have
done is cleared up a lot of the mistakes
that Warburg made and the
misinterpretation of the cancer field
and not not fully understanding all of
this.
Um, but you know, when we look at tumors
uh, under the electron microscope, all
the major cancers,
they have abnormalities in the number
and structure of their of their
mitochondria, and when you and when you
uh, look at their function, the
mitochondrial function is abnormal.
Um, now,
it doesn't happen overnight. As Warburg
said, if you critically damage your
mitochondria, it usually the cell will
die.
Uh, but in the case of chronic
interruption of oxidative
phosphorylation in some population of
cells in some tissue, over time,
the cell has an opportunity to uh,
replace oxidative phosphorylation with
the ancient pathways of substrate level
phosphorylation.
Uh, these are fermentation pathways.
Now, these are the same pathways that
existed in our cells prior to the oxygen
entering into the atmosphere 2 and 1/2
billion years ago.
Um, so, you in order to understand
cancer, you have to understand
evolutionary biology.
You have to understand that. If you
don't understand that, then then you
cannot understand what I am saying.
Um, and believe me, there are very few
people that really understand
evolutionary biology.
So, when we look at cancer cells,
they're just simply falling back on
these ancient fermentation pathways that
exist in almost all of our cells, but
are are are are are very minor. They
prepare glucose for um,
the molecule called pyruvate, which is
fully oxidized in the mitochondria. But
if the mitochondria are not functional,
the pyruvate is reduced to lactic acid,
and the cells then, in order to replace
the efficiency of oxidative
phosphorylation,
ha- have to have a treme- a large
logistic supply of fermentable fuels in
the microenvironment. Now, you also have
to realize
that the organelle that controls the
destiny of our cells, uh, when to grow,
when not to grow, when to remain
quiescent, that is the mitochondria.
That organelle
controls the destiny of our cells.
Um,
is cancer is cell division out of
control. Why Why is this cell now out of
control?
Because the organelle that allows it to
be under control is corrupted, and the
cell is falling back on ancient
fermentation pathways because the
organelle that's supposed to prevent
that is now dysfunctional.
And the cell now requires a large amount
of fermentable fuel to maintain a life.
But the problem is the life is no longer
regulated, it's dysregulated. And you
have to realize, based on the work of
Albert Szent-Györgyi and others,
the alpha period of life on earth was
hypoxic. There was no uh, oxygen in the
atmosphere, and all of the single-cell
organisms at that time grew unprolifera-
unbridled proliferation driven by a
fermentation metabolism. Cancer is doing
nothing more than doing that. And it's
driven by a fermentation metabolism.
And then
so that's the disease. That's the
disorder. A fermentation driven
a group of cells out of control because
the organelle that's supposed to control
them is no longer capable of doing that.
So the modern modern lifestyle harms the
mitochondria of the cell, which then
causes it to flip to an ancient pathway
we have
fermentation. Is that a that is that
some sort of redundant backup mechanism?
Much like we have two kidneys, we have
two eyes, two ears. Is this fermentation
it's it's a default. It's a default
mechanism. It's a default mechanism.
Like the the default state of cells is
proliferation, not quiescent. The
default what it falls back on basically.
So oxidative phosphorylation is the the
newer evolved form of energy.
Fermentation originated was the first
form of energy because there was no
oxygen. So cancer cells can live without
oxygen. We've tested it ourselves. Let
me give you an example. We can grow
cancer cells in in extremely oxygen
depleted
environments. Extreme hypoxia. And they
grow fine.
But the one that everybody should know
about is cyanide. Cyanide is a poison
that kills you real quick.
What cyanide does is it binds to
the cytochrome c oxidase, shuts down the
electron transport chain,
not allowing oxygen to accept electrons,
and we die. We die fast from cyanide.
Cancer cells can live in cyanide
because they don't use oxygen as a form
of energy. So cancers and we published
this our big paper from last week. We
showed we clearly showed in cyanide and
hypoxia cancer cells are still making
energy ATP despite the fact that they
have no oxygen and they're in presence
of cyanide. That clearly tells us that
these damn cells are fermenting to stay
alive. So how do you kill them? You have
to take away the fermentation fuels.
And that's the way you kill cancer. You
transition the whole body to nutritional
ketosis and then you come in and
simultaneously target the two
fermentable fuels. And this then puts us
on the path for health and recovery.
Yes, diet and lifestyle
will damage mitochondria in some
population of cells in some organ and
you end up with cancer.
You can have systemic inflammation that
comes from diabetes and obesity and
systemic inflammation damages
mitochondria in some population of
cells. Intermittent hypoxia, chemical
carcinogens, oncogenic viruses,
radiation. Any of those exposures over
chronic time will damage oxidative
phosphorylation leading to a
compensatory fermentation.
So this again, we we collected we we
connected all of the dots in this whole
thing. We have connected all of the
dots, how cancer comes, how it starts,
what it goes through, and how it kills
you. Okay, most of the time what's
killing you about 50% of the time is the
treatments they're using to manage the
cancer rather than the cancer itself.
It's one of the great tragedies of of
medicine.
Yes, I mean I've got some questions
around what standard of care does to
metabolic health down the line. But just
just before we get there, I'd love to
sort of go back upstream. So we have
dysregulation of the mitochondria, which
causes this switch to fermentation. You
get a cancer cell.
What would the consensus view say to
what you just said?
Well, they think cancer is a genetic
disease.
The consensus view is that cancer is a
genetic disease and and all of the
mitochondrial abnormalities must be
coming from some gene mutations.
What we and others others have shown
clearly is that when you damage the
mitochondria or the mitochondria becomes
inefficient in using oxygen
it it throws out these radicals, these
oxygen radicals.
The anionic
superoxide and all these kinds of
things.
They cause they're carcinogenic and
mutagenic.
So the mutations in the nucleus
are actually downstream effects of the
damage to the oxidative phosphorylation
system.
So and this is the a very bitter bitter
bitter pill for the field to swallow
that the mutations are really not the
cause, they're the effects of this. And
we have a problem. It's part of us being
human.
Human nature rejects
when when the brain has been
indoctrinated to think a certain way
about a situation.
It often is no longer capable of
rationally of rational thinking.
Religion is like this. You know, when
people become indoctrinated into a
particular religion, they would rather
die than change their religion
because they have the brain has been so
molded and indoctrinated. You can't
think anything other than what you've
been
brainwashed to think.
And
you have that and then you have also
you have confirmation bias
where because everybody says it must be
this way, it has to be that way.
So you have ideological dogmatic
indoctrination together with
confirmation bias. And those two
together uh
make the brain incapable of either
understanding or accepting what I'm
saying.
Even even when they see the data,
they can't accept it. So
and and
you know, eventually you have to have it
replaced because right now in the United
States we have 1,700 people a day dying
from cancer.
That's about 70 people per hour.
So we're going to let ideological dogma
stop us from helping these poor
suffering people. So what are we going
to say to these guys these poor people?
I'm sorry we cannot treat you with
metabolic therapy because of
confirmation bias and
ideological dogma.
That cancer is a genetic disease. So we
have to radiate and poison you to make
you healthy and do all these medieval
kinds of treatments because we cannot
accept the fact that cancer is something
other than what we thought it was.
It's one of the great tragedies of the
times.
It's it's really something the late
great Charlie Munger has
a line on always got two two lines that
come to mind of the human mind works
like a human egg. When a sperm gets in
it, it shuts off. Right? And I think
it's the same with these ideas. When you
get these grand narratives in, they shut
off to anything else. And the other line
he he had, which is is relevant to our
our discussion here
is
it's super hard to have a non-consensus
view in the world and
be there touting this when the herd is
going the other way. And it takes a
special a special amount of gumption to
do that.
I know you've been traveling this for
years, right? I mean you've been met
with a load of pushback and now you've
been proved right. How have you Well,
they ignore it. I don't think they give
us pushback. I think both this is what
they always do. They ignore it.
They just don't discuss it. And then
when you talk to people, oh they say,
you know, it's not right.
But I said, have you looked at and read
the literature? Have you actually looked
at the data? No, no, I I just go with
what everybody says. Okay.
So
and we're still writing enormous papers
published in top journals hunting
hunting for the genes that cause cancer.
This is a futile
effort. This is absurd to do this. And
they always grab if you look at these
papers, they've got like 50 50 authors
on the paper hunting for some damn gene
that never that doesn't exist. So we
have found papers
in the scientific literature that show
some cancers have no mutations. They've
they've been looking.
So the somatic mutation theory of
cancer, this is the current theory of
cancer, is cancer is caused by mutations
in the nucleus.
These are called somatic mutations.
Okay? So they they they cause the the
cancer. So we have we have found papers
where there's no mutations. And it's
very interesting. The authors of those
papers even ignore their own findings.
They you would think that if you saw a
tumor with no mutations, you'd have to
say, "Whoa, we should discuss this a
little bit more in light of our current
theory." No. All those papers ignored
it. They didn't say anything about the
theory under which they're working.
So then they reclassified mutations
realizing that some of them don't do
anything
and they're just there. But the really
important ones are the so-called driver
mutations. So this was pointed out by
Dr. Vogelstein at the Johns Hopkins that
we we have these other kinds of
mutations that are really the ones that
lead to dysregulated growth and they're
called drivers as opposed to passengers.
Well, we have different now categories
of mutations. So the new findings coming
out of the scientific literature over
the last few years is that our normal
cells
are full of these driver mutations. Even
in the P53, everybody loves P53 this you
know
T you know,
P53 cytochrome c oxidase synthase. It's
they always like oh P53 P53. We have
dozens dozens of mutations in our P53
genes in normal tissues that have no no
dysregulated cell growth.
So how you explain this? How you explain
cancers that have no mutations and
normal cells loaded with driver
mutations that don't have dysregulated
growth? And then you throw in the
nuclear mitochondrial transfer
experiments on top of all this
showing that the nucleus of a tumor cell
placed into a normal cytoplasm
has regulated growth. And if I take the
nucleus of a normal cell and put it into
a tumor cytoplasm, it has dysregulated
growth.
All of this evidence says
it can't be a genetic disease. So, what
are you doing? Why don't you read the
literature? Why don't you understand
this? And people say, "Well, if it were
important, people would have repeated
it."
I said it's been repeated dozens and
dozens of times. You just choose not to
not to acknowledge it. What are you
going to do? You know, it's like grab
the guy's head and smash his face into
the data and say, "Listen, read it,
jackass." And you'll come to understand
what's going on here.
You know.
I definitely I
I agree with you.
It's amazing. And then when they realize
it's only a matter of time
they're going to realize what what I'm
saying and they're going to look at the
data. Oh, yeah, it was obvious all
along. Oh, yeah, right. Well, I'm
telling you it wasn't obvious all along.
Yeah, what is it? The the stars look
obvious in the in in hindsight, right?
But
what would you say to people What would
you say to people who are concerned or
have been told about the bracket gene
and breast cancer and it's seen as a bit
of a death sentence? How does the
metabolic theory of cancer reframe the
bracket mutation, if at all? Well, the
bracket mutation, when you look at all
the all the those are germ line those
are germ line mutations now. They're not
somatic mutations. Somatic mutations are
not linked to the germ line. Then you
have germ line risk factors. They're
called risk factors, genetic germ line
risk factors.
When you look at bracket one, what does
bracket one do? It damages the
efficiency of the mitochondria.
So,
uh clearly it's linked. P and the
Li-Fraumeni, which which is the P53 um
germ line mutation, that's about 90%
penetrant, meaning 90% of the people
that have that gene will go on to
develop some form of cancer in their
lifetime, but 10% don't. Uh no no germ
line mutation is 100% penetrant, meaning
it's a risk factor.
What we have but no cancer has been
found with normal number structure and
function of mitochondria. So, the that
the mitochondria is the prime cause of
all all cancers, but that can happen
from germ line mutations like bracket,
it can happen from P53, retinoblastoma.
There's a whole slug of these
uh
risk germ line risk factors. Um but if
you know that all of them in one way or
another damage oxidative phosphorylation
leading to a compensatory substrate
level phosphorylation, we know how to
change our diet and lifestyle to reduce
the risk of those cancers. Now,
like in the case of the actress Angelina
Jolie, she had her breasts and ovaries
removed or something as a prophylactic.
Uh and other women do the same thing and
and uh they feel that if I cut off the
organs that are going to lead to this uh
but then but that doesn't guarantee that
there won't be other uh parts of your
body that later on develop. So, if you
understand
that it's a mitochondrial metabolic
disease and if you keep your
mitochondria healthy, the probability of
getting a cancer is significantly
reduced, then you might want to embrace
meta a metabolic lifestyle to reduce the
risk rather than have yourself
surgically mutilated. Um you know,
there's choices. People have choices
when they understand the facts and the
data
they can have they can make choices and
that's the thing. Okay, you can still
have your be surgically mutilated and
still go on the metabolic therapy. I
mean, there's a lot of variations back
or forth back and forth for this whole
thing, but at least people should be
know what the hell is going on so they
can make an informed choice about about
their plans.
Okay, so it's not a genetic disease.
It's a disease of the mitochondria and
the metabolism of the cell.
Um how does that implement how does that
change your approach of dealing with
cancer as it as it relates to how we cut
off its fuel?
Well, I mean, we have two things here.
The interesting thing about
metabolic therapy
uh and recognizing cancer as a
mitochondrial metabolic disease
is that not only can you use an approach
to prevent cancer
uh so, if you keep your mitochondria
healthy with diet and lifestyle changes,
you can re- significantly reduce the
risk of getting cancer. But let's be
honest, most members of our Western
societies, regardless regardless of the
whether in the UK uh the United States,
Germany, Japan. Most people most people
uh
roll the dice and say, "Well, I'll deal
with it when I get it." So, that's
that's what most people have to deal
with is is when they're finally
diagnosed with cancer
how do they manage the cancer?
So, um how do they manage this regulated
cell growth? And and that big paper we
we came out with uh last week
uh fleshes out in a very great detail
what options we have to manage a cancer
when when we get it. It was based on our
press pulse
uh therapeutic strategy.
You know, I wrote the press pulse
therapeutic strategy with some clinician
colleagues and Dominic D'Agostino.
So, uh that was the framework. It it
wasn't fleshed out. It was the
scientific uh framework for what you
would need to do uh uh to manage cancer.
Um but now we have a much more fleshed
out protocol
uh for for doing this and there's many
many options, but clearly
if the tumor cell
can't grow without ferment fermental
fermentation metabolism, then the
strategy is to uh restrict the
availability of the fuels uh driving the
fermentation metabolism and that becomes
the sugar glucose and the amino acid
glutamine.
Um
uh as I said, we can we can press down
glutamine with with diets and we have to
pulse
uh correction, we can press down glucose
and we can pulse the glutamine. But we
do this when the when the body is
transitioned over to uh nutritional
ketosis, therapeutic ketosis. And we we
also built here at Boston College the
glucose ketone index calculator, which
has now been put into these um uh
devices
um
that will allow people to know when
they're in nutritional ketosis
quantitatively
so there's no guesswork on this.
Um and then and then you come in with
drugs um
that will target glutamine while the
body is in nutritional ketosis with low
glucose, elevated ketones
and uh the cutting edge right now is
dosage, timing, and scheduling. Uh we we
have not yet perfected uh all of the
ways in which we can dose, time, and
schedule the the different parts of
metabolic therapies. That's the future
right now. But we also don't exclude uh
parts of the standards of care. Uh we
can significantly reduce toxicity of
radiation and chemo
uh when you're in nutritional ketosis.
We can actually lower dosages
significantly and still maintain some
therapeutic uh efficacy of these toxic
drugs. Um in particular,
immunotherapies. You know, everybody's
jumping up and down about these
immunotherapies.
You know, they're based on the somatic
mutation theory. So, by by themselves,
they will never be optimal for managing
most cancers.
However, what it's very interesting, you
know, they say, "Well, immunotherapies
can't work well on solid tumors because
of the acidification in the tumor
microenvironment."
So, this is this Let me tell you this is
how crazy it is. So, what's causing the
acidification in the microenvironment is
the is the is the waste products of
glucose and glutamine fermentation.
The waste products are lactic acid and
succinic acid. These are the acidified
waste products of the tumor cells.
And everybody's trying to figure out uh
how we break through the acidification
of the microenvironment to allow
immunotherapies to work, for Christ's
sake. Pull out the glucose and glutamine
and now your immunotherapies will
probably have a much greater effect. So,
it's it's like I don't understand. Don't
they read the literature? Don't they
understand what the hell is going on
here? I mean, we can make all of these
approaches for cancer so much more
effective and efficient if they simply
understand this is a mitochondrial
metabolic disease driven by a
fermentation metabolism. It's
unbelievable.
I'll tell you what's going on here in
the UK and you you probably know it
already, but say if someone has cancer
in the UK
they would, even if they've read the
papers, they trust the judgment of the
doc, if they're not medically trained.
They trust the judgment of the doctor
over their own ability to read the paper
if they're not from a scientific
background. So, they could be
well-intentioned and read on all the
literature, but they go into an oncology
ward and say, "Okay, I appreciate you
put me on chemo and radio for my cancer
I have. I want to implement a ketogenic
diet. I want to
uh the pulse press strategy. I figured
out a way to get some uh glutamine
blockers. What do you think?" And
they're met with a response which is
completely negative because A, it's "I
don't recommend that. It hasn't been
studied." or
"I have no idea what you're talking
about." What do you say to people who
are in that situation?
Well, it's like the blind leading the
blind, right?
I mean, you you go to you go to
It's terrible, right? You go to the guy
who's supposed to know what's He has no
clue. And that's really embarrassing.
And um yeah, but that has to change. Uh
you have to educate these guys. They're
not stupid people. They just lack
knowledge.
So, uh um obviously they got to a
position in their life where they they
they think they know something. And in
many parts of medicine, that's true. I
mean, as I said, orthopedic medicine and
cardiovascular heart replacements, all
this kind of stuff. I mean, this is
unbelievable stuff. But when it comes to
cancer, they're in the Stone Age. They
have no clue what's going on.
So, uh um they have to be re-educated.
And the patients
uh have to be knowledgeable as well
because mitochondrial metabolic therapy
requires a very strong participation of
the patient. So, the patient really
needs to know what's going on and be a
uh uh
um
compliant uh with the with the
recommendations of the oncologist. Um
but if the oncologist has has no clue
what's going on, it's a very frustrating
situation because sometimes the patients
know more than the oncologist. The
patients So, what what we do is you know
eventually it's going to have to come
but I
like the patient just brings in the plan
and says here do give this to you you
give me the the glutamine targeting
drugs at this dosage. You tell but you
it would be more important for the
oncologist to know what dosage and
timing and scheduling he should do he
should do. Why should the patient have
to tell the
the the professional what to do?
Um
Yes. So it
and this is the great tragedy.
The
problem is the poor guys and all
all the all over the world I've never
seen anything like it in India, China,
Japan, Germany, UK, United States,
Brazil. They're all doing the same same
thing. They have no clue what what's
causing cancer how it's managed or
anything. So we have to have a I don't
know how would we do this? We have to
retrain
we have to re-educate. Bottom line is
there's a a tremendous
uh uh
desire on the part of the patients to
have this because they're being
slaughtered with the current therapies.
You know they're being brutalized. I
mean even the the guys who ran the
Spanish Inquisition would be impressed
on how we torture cancer patients. You
know
this is just the hair falls out the gums
are bleeding blowing the
microbiome to pieces. I mean this is
nuts. You don't have to do all this
stuff but they get managed to cancer.
Yet this is what we're doing.
You know. Okay so for
where does someone listening to this
who's not familiar with the harms of
standard of care where is the standard
of care correct and what are they doing
right and then what are the problems and
downsides of standard of care?
Well I mean you know it's remarkable I
always find it absolutely astonishing
that some people
human beings can be brutalized poisoned
and irradiated and surgically mutilated
and still survive. Um
and we have we have well the system will
say
well we have millions of cancer
survivors that have
been cured by the by the standards of
care.
And that's true but many many many of
these folks pay a serious significant
price for for that management. They have
neuropsychiatric problems, digestive
problems, hormonal problems, bone
density problems, cardiovascular
problems. You go to write down the list.
And most of them don't live a full life.
They die later on from some other
collateral damage from whatever they've
been taking.
When we do metabolic therapy
these these people that do it correctly
they they get much healthier.
They they all organs in their body start
to
perform at a higher at a higher
physiological level. Um because we're
we're using ketones which is a super
fuel that allows the cells to gain
energy
that don't the G prime hydra
ATP hydrolysis is much more effective.
We produce fewer radicals. We make
mitochondria healthy in all the normal
cells of our body while we're degrading
the tumor. I mean this is a win-win
situation all around. Now but we also
know that some parts of the standard of
care can be significantly improved and
made less toxic by by dovetailing it
with metabolic management metabolic
therapy. So clearly the field is going
to have to readjust its entire way of
doing business. Uh if we want to keep
people healthy and managed. And don't
forget
we don't ever claim cure. We just claim
effective management non-toxic
management. You know who can you claim
we're going to cure cancer?
You don't know. Okay they say you've
been having
you've been cancer-free for 5 years but
then at 5 and 1/2 years the tumor
returned returns. So you were never
really cured even using standards of
care. Now some people do how would you
know? If you die at 98 years old when
you have cancer at 35 and you died from
a heart attack then obviously you
probably were cured from cancer. But but
we don't know that. We just like to know
that we have a disorder that was
previously minimally managed without
with with toxicity. Now we might be able
to manage it better without toxicity and
lead to a overall improved overall
survival not this progression-free
survival. They what they do is they
approve drugs based on progression-free
survival.
Which means that you you give the drug
and it looks like the tumor is
responding really well but you don't
live much longer. What the hell is that?
You you want to make sure overall
survival. Show me show me a guy like for
example glioblastoma almost everybody is
dead within 3 years almost. Every now
and then you get a rare survivor makes
it to 5 years. If we make 5 years the
the average survival for glioblastoma
that changes the pattern completely. So
then you know you're on the right track
and this is what our plan is not only
for glioblastoma but for all these
different horrific metastatic cancers.
Standard of care chemo and radio
specifically
I assume could harm the mitochondria of
the cell which could lead to more cancer
down the line if they
beat their first cancer they've harmed
the mitochondria through the standard
care. Is there an argument if that's
true is there an argument that being on
in a ketogenic state which is good for
your mitochondria anyway would offset
the negative damages of standard of
care?
Well I think so.
The problem is we need to do
those kinds of experiments and they're
currently not allowed to be done at
clinical centers right now. Uh so you
would have for example you'd have
standard of care one one population of
of people would get standard of care
which is what everybody basically gets.
Then you get standard of care with
metabolic therapy.
And then you get metabolic therapy
without standard of care.
So you have
you have three different groups and then
you'd be able to clearly determine to
what extent
these would be
effective.
Now we are able to do
in glioblastoma we're able to do
standard of we do standard of care first
and then the tumor invariably recurs.
And then they're then they're allowed to
do
add on a metabolic therapy ketogenic
metabolic but never the way we've
designed it. No one has ever done a
clinical trial the way we think it
should be done. And that's our big paper
from last week. That tells you exactly
how you should do a clinical trial. The
problem is it's threatening. If it works
what happens if these things work?
You're going to have to change the whole
design of what we do for cancer. But God
forbid anybody wants to do the three
groups and we turn out that the
metabolic therapy by itself is superior
to the standard of care and even the
standard of care with metabolic therapy.
What's that going to say? You know who
the hell wants to do standard of care
anymore?
But but but I think it all could be
worked out. I mean don't forget this is
we're at the tip of the spear here at
Boston College. We're the ones that that
did all this. And we're working it out
all the time. We have a very
comprehensive preclinical system. We we
test all this preclinically first and we
only use natural models. We don't use
these genetically engineered
things. You know they make all these
animal models for cancer there the
cancer cells are genetically engineered
the mouse is genetically engineered I
mean it's just like what the hell you're
doing? Use natural
tumors natural tumors that arose
naturally in those hosts. And then you
can design and perfect what you need to
do for doses timing and scheduling and
then you can bring that into the clinic
and modify preclinical clinical back and
forth back and forth and perfect the
system so you know what's going to be
maximally effective for the cancer
patients. Mhm.
I I think I read in my prep for this
where
if you're trying to naturally induce
cancer in a mouse to then study it you
were trying to do this but you were
calorie restricting the mice and it was
very hard to actually implement some
sort of cancer in the mice if I if I
read that right?
Well well
we we there's several you know I've
worked on this we developed natural
models of brain cancer and metastatic
cancer.
Um most of these arose naturally in this
one strain of mouse. Now I also made a
lot of models putting chemical
carcinogens into the brain
of mice
and then you could get tumors that
arose.
None of these tumors that I ever made in
the brain were were
metastatic. They were highly angiogenic.
They were not metastatic highly
invasive. But then we discovered the
VMM3 coming out of the VM Dickerson
strain of mouse out of Edinburgh
Scotland. They sent us some mice so we
started to see these spontaneous tumors
brain cancer tumors coming out of these
mice spontaneous that we didn't do
anything to them they just developed
naturally. And then we characterized the
cell in the tumor and it turned out to
be a macrophage a microglial type cell.
And then we went and did a a big study
on all human cancers and we found out
that all major human cancers have
characteristics of macrophages or
microglia.
Which is a cell that can spread around
your body. So we now know the biology of
metastasis which is the ultimate killer
of most people. We know what the cell
is. We know the biology of the cell. So
what I did is I went back and I said
okay let's further evaluate the biology
of the macrophage. And there's a couple
of guys at Oxford there the the
Newscombs who have done their their work
actually clued us to what we need to do
to manage metastatic cancer if you can
believe it. So they they interrogated
macrophages and found out what they eat.
What is the fuels that drive macrophage
biology? It turns out to be glutamine.
So, glutamine is a major fuel for
macrophages. So, what we did was we
said, well, if all metastatic cancers
have some characteristics of macrophage,
Warburg clearly showed and we all
Everybody knows glucose is already a a
major fuel. But, the glutamine came
because we understood that macrophages,
which are the origin of metastatic
cancer, need the glutamine. So, that's
why we can manage all these cancers,
whether it's a brain tumor, colon tumor,
breast tumor. They're all They're all
macrophage They're all They're all
macrophage biology. So, now you know how
to kill them.
And Oh, but if you think it's a genetic
disease, then you don't even listen to
what I'm saying. So, you're you're out
of left field somewhere.
So, with uh that perfectly segues into
the uh into the pulse section of the
pulse press uh methodology. So, the the
the press is the continuous state in a
ketogenic diet, right? Which we'll get
to afterwards. Love to explore. But, the
the the pulse, what Firstly, why the
need to pulse
uh glutamine inhibitors?
And secondly,
well, I think first of all, the press,
it's not just ketogenic diet. It's the
state of of of um a nutritional ketosis.
You can get into nutritional ketosis
with Mediterranean diets,
uh with carnivore diets,
uh with vegan diets. It's hard with
vegan diets, uh vegetarians and that
kind of stuff. Pescatarian diets. Uh
whatever your glu you you get your GKI
down. I don't give a damn what you eat.
Uh
People Oh, can I eat this? Oh, but
Seefried says you can. I don't Seefried
says you eat whatever the hell you want
as long as you can keep your GKI down.
And then people will come to know
they're all different from each other.
Uh what you might be eat might be
somebody else can't eat that or
whatever. It doesn't say what what
should I eat. You really want to know?
Don't eat anything. Just drink water.
Get your Get your
So,
for those who will say, "Well, I can't
do that." Okay, then then you throw the
dice
Yes. It's hard. I'm not saying this is
easy stuff.
No, it's super hard. And GKI is a gluco-
glucose ketone index which you you
developed, which is taking My
understanding it's a ratio between your
blood levels of beta-hydroxybutyrate and
contrasted with blood levels of glucose.
Is that right? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah,
it's in millimolar. So, you can you can
use the same units to to make the
division. And when you get down into the
like my friend Dominic D'Agostino, he's
always in a new state of nutritional
ketosis. He lives in that He lives in
that zone. That was our ancestor. All of
our ancestors during the Paleolithic
period were always in nutritional
ketosis. They didn't have delicatessens
on every corner. They weren't eating
sugar-filled donuts. They they were very
active people. Nutritional ketosis is
our natural state. This is our our
natural state. This is who we are as a
as a biology.
So,
not being in ketosis is an abnormal
state.
It's our It's our normal to be normal.
We made the abnormal. And now we're
suffering from all these chronic
diseases as the result of it.
So, um
going to ask you
But, so yeah, you
you get your you get your body into
nutritional ketosis and then you pulse
the glutamine uh targeting.
And uh we know as the Newsome said, uh
the
uh the glutamine is an essential
nutrient for macrophages and the gut and
the urea cycle and all these very
important physiological conditions in
our body. When people are burned, you
have to give them high doses of
glutamine because the macrophages kill
the bacteria that enter into our system.
We have a We have a powerful immune
system that will kill bacteria. And and
that's those macrophages that kill the
entering bacteria uh or wounds or this
kind of thing uh need the glutamine. So,
um
so you have to be very very careful. So,
you if you're if you're know your
metastatic tumor cell
which is an immune cell
uh a macrophage or a leukocyte of one of
these types, they know that tumor cell
needs the glutamine as much as the
normal gut needs the glutamine, as much
as our normal immune system need the
glutamine. So,
what we find is that when we use
glutamine targeting drugs, they kill
cancer cells, but they paralyze the
immune system.
Uh
they don't kill the immune system, they
just paralyze it. So, if you kill a lot
of cancer cells, uh one of the functions
of our M2 macrophages, one of the
populations, is to pick up dead cells
and gobble them up and get rid of the
get rid of the the of the the dead cells
in the microenvironment. You can't let a
let a bunch of dead cancer cells hang
around. You need an active immune system
to come in and clean up the mess. So,
you have to pulse You cannot uh uh
uh
continually use glutamine targeting
drugs. Yes, you'll kill tumor cells, but
you'll also paralyze our own immune
system and screw up our gut and our urea
cycle. You'll do a a lot of other
physiological changes. So, that's why
doses, timing, and scheduling is what is
the is the cutting edge of cancer
research right now. For me, I don't know
what the rest of the world is doing. For
them, they're they're out of left field
somewhere. So, so how is um
Let me just say, the what I've just said
is not what we call sexy science. Wow,
this is sexy. Doses, timing, and
scheduling. No, it's not. It gets the
job done, but it ain't sexy.
Mhm. Well, who who cares if it gets the
job done. How is your how you invented
the press pulse protocol with your
colleagues as as you alluded to. And
then your most recent paper as well is
it shows
uh the implementation of it with
specific glioblastomas. How is the press
pulse protocol changed since you
developed it? And what is this leading
uh edge you
you alluded to there with regards to
dosage, timing, and scheduling?
Well, press pulse hasn't really changed.
We we know what we do because we have to
press the glucose down, which is not
toxic. There's just different ways to do
it. What what what we're learning is
there's different different strategies
to to do with the
the press pulse.
Uh you have to realize where did where
did this come from um in the first
place? Where where did we get the idea
press? This comes from the the area of
paleobiology.
Okay?
Uh during the history of our earth, uh
we've had massive extinctions of
organisms over over the eons. Okay? And
this didn't happen by any one event. It
happened by a combination of two events.
There was a chronic stress on
populations from some change in
in the environment followed by an acute
pulse like a meteor strike or a series
of many volcanoes going off at similar
time. And that led to mass extinction of
organisms on the history of our earth.
So, we just took the same concept and
put it into managing cancer. So, you you
press down and make
a stress on the whole body
uh
putting putting the cancer cells at a
competitive disadvantage.
And then you come in and you give them
the
uh the final shot in the head
with the glutamine targeting. And uh but
it has to be done very strategically.
And and the ways that we're going to do
this is going to be really nifty and and
and and and interesting because there's
so many different ways We use
parasite medications. It turns out
parasites and cancer cells use common
metabolic pathways to get energy. So, we
can We have a whole slug of these
different drugs that could be used in
the right way. You can't believe how
many ways that we can kill cancer cells
without harming the rest of the body.
It's absolutely unbelievable.
Okay, let's get into let's get into
those then. Uh when when you think
cancer is a genetic disease, you're not
even listening to what I'm saying.
You're hunting for You're on the
constant hunt for genes that don't
exist.
Yes. Yes. Okay, let's get into those
then. So, what are the most promising
uh glutamine inhibitors or glutamine
blockers? And what are the most
accessible?
Well, this is the another great tragedy.
The most the most powerful one is is
DON, 6-diazo-5-oxo-L-norleucine,
which has been kicked around for a long
time. Was used on little kids. It was
used on on cancer patients years ago.
It's an antibiotic. Um
uh from a staff strep, I think, it was
isolated at one point. And they didn't
know how to use it. They dumped large
doses on these poor cancer patients
without targeting the glucose.
I mean, if you don't know what you're
doing or how you're doing it, then the
outcome will never be optimal. So, so we
now know what we need to do with this.
Yes. And then the drug companies all
come in with their glutamine targeting
drugs just so they can make a profit. I
I said, "Why are you interested in the
profit or the outcome of the patient?"
Of course, it's the profit, not the
outcome of the patient. So, I said, "If
you It's a really manage it, you got to
put the patient in nutritional ketosis,
then come in with your special drugs and
see how it works." But, they said, "Oh,
but if if we won't know if it's the if
it's the if it's the gluco- glucose
targeting or our drug that's working." I
said, "Who gives a damn? The patient is
going to be the benefici- beneficiary of
this." "Oh, no, we can't do that." So,
the whole system, the structure of the
the pharmaceutical industry in trying to
build their drugs is is all screwed up.
So, you you have to come in with the
outcome of what's going to be the best
for this patient. Can my new drug work
effectively with nutritional ketosis and
make it better than nutritional ketosis
without toxicity? And the answer is the
pharmaceutical companies are all over
this kind of a concept. It's just that
they won't do it with nutritional
ketosis until somebody tells them to do
that.
Mhm.
But,
but that's going to be the future. So,
yes, there's going to be a lot of drugs
potentially like DON. Uh
D O N. Um Why is it not available? Uh
Oh, they said it was too toxic. What are
you kidding me relative to doxorubicin
and all these other things that we have
out there?
I mean, uh
it's not that That should be That should
be a prime drug in in the drug industry
is is Don should be there and delivered
under nutritional ketosis. You're going
to get some tremendous outcome from
this. So, a big problem I've come across
with
people I know who have cancer who are
trying to implement this is A, they
can't get Don, right? They're measuring
the GKI, all good. They're going through
standard care as well.
They can't get Don, but yet there's some
efficacy in research.
I found found a good paper on EGCG,
found a good paper on berberine, milk
thistle show potential as effective
glutamine blockers. Are these viable
options for people who can't find Don?
Well, they're they're they're not going
to harm and in some cases they do help.
Uh but they're they're minor.
They're they're not the big dog. They're
not the big stick.
Uh why are you not allowed to use the
big stick? Uh why Yes, berberine and
these other thing we have all that in
the in the in the in the flash tail
press pulse. Uh these are uh supplements
that could work together with the
uh with the different options for sure.
We don't we don't uh uh
discourage the use of those what you
just mentioned.
But some of the parasite medications are
are even more powerful.
And they don't and they're also very
non-toxic. So, the question is how you
get all this together. The the the issue
here is yes, if we had access to Don,
which should be I I have no idea why the
government why this every people should
be marching in the streets for this
stuff. I don't know why why the most
powerful drugs are not being used
and they're putting this other crap on
top of us, you know, it's like what the
hell is going on here?
So, um but but any event, yes, so you
have to do the combos.
Now, the other thing too is many cancer
patients
start to realize metabolic therapy
only after all of their toxic treatments
are not working.
Um they say, "Oh, okay, standard of care
in my case didn't work. My tumor is
recurring. Uh
sometimes they say there's nothing more
we can do. We've done everything, you
know, why why did you go in that
direction in the first place?" The first
thing you do
is is get your body into nutritional
ketosis. Don't worry
But this is the thing, lack of
knowledge. Uh scientific illiteracy.
This is a plague that our our species
already has. So, you're not you you and
and listen, most people always trust
their physician because they're supposed
to know.
But in the case of cancer, they don't
know. Most of them have no clue. Not all
of them. Most of them think glucose or
eat any eat anything you want to eat.
What are you kidding me?
These guys don't read the scientific
literature understand the biology. I
mean this is nuts. But anyway, so this
is the training.
Yeah, I mean it's hard when you go to a
oncology ward and it's just full of
glucose everywhere. It just seems almost
immoral when you're walking around it.
Um so, could you What is the specific
parasite drug? Just before we get back
you have a bunch of them. Um you know,
you have mebendazole, fenbendazole,
ivermectin might work on this case.
There's there's a number of them. Um
Simon Yu
from
St. Louis, Missouri has studied a whole
bunch of these parasite medications. And
and people say, "Well, why are you doing
that?"
And
parasite medications target the
substrate mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorylation, which is a discovery
that that we made that how how This is a
very interesting thing
is that the glutamine is fermented in
the mitochondria dumping out succinic
acid. So, it it it So, it makes look
like the mitochondria healthy. Uh but
the glu it's not respired, it's
fermented. That's the big thing. It's a
ferment amino acid fermentation.
Let me give you an example. This is
unbelievable.
If people have heart attacks and many
people do, uh if he's no longer
breathing because his heart stopped. His
blood immediately fills up with glucose
and glutamine correction. His
bloodstream fills up with lactic acid
and succinic acid
as soon as the the heart attack happens.
Lactic acid is the waste product of of
substrate level phosphorylation in the
glycolysis pathway of the cytoplasm of
the cell because the mitochondria aren't
working because there's no oxygen. So,
pyruvate is reduced to lactate to
produce give us some energy out of the
out of the the cytoplasm. At the same
time, glutamine, the most abundant amino
acid in the body,
is being fermented very rapidly with
succinic acid as the waste product of
that fermentation metabolism. So, that
told us these
the difference As soon as you start
breathing again, the lactic acid and
succinic acid disappear from your
bloodstream because your mitochondria
back on track again.
Cancer cells are locked into this
fermentation metabolism whether or not
oxygen is present in the environment.
Very clear. These cancer cells have been
telling us for decades what is wrong
with them. The cancer has been screaming
at us saying, "I am living on
fermentation. If you take away my
fermentation, you will kill me."
The cancer cells have been telling us
that for decades and we have chosen not
to listen to them.
Well, well, hopefully we're in a
I it's it's it's it's it's really
interesting. I mean it's a new rabbit
hole for me as of the last 6 months and
it just seems it seems bizarre why
people aren't coming on. However, your
two recent papers, I guess make a very
big contribution in making this more
widely accessible and mainstream. Tell
Could you tell us about the the two
recent papers?
Well, if they will make it they'll make
a a difference if people actually read
them.
You know, the the problem is that the
people who should be reading them aren't
reading them.
So, that the status the status quo
continues.
Uh the first the first paper we just
published was um amino acid and glucose
fermentation are driving the
disregulated growth of brain tumor
cells. So, we used the human and mouse
uh brain cancers and they they're both
driven by this fermentation metabolism.
And then how did we know glutamine was
the one? We interrogated these tumor
cells. So, we listen to this.
You take you take the the cells and you
grow them in culture
uh and you don't let them you just grow
them in saline solution salt solution uh
buffered a buffered salt solution and
they die. There's no food. The the cells
are all dead after about 24 48 hours.
And then you just add a few stacks one
at a time one at a time one amino acid
another only one only one do the
experiment and you find out that when
you add the glutamine, boom, these damn
cells get all excited. They start living
again. So, um so clearly they don't die.
Glutamine prevented death.
Uh and we went through all the different
amino acids. Yes, asparagine. Yes, a
little glutamate. Yes, there's a little
but then in vivo in back in the tumor,
you have to say, "Well, what are the
What are the fuels that are present in
sufficient quantity in the
microenvironment that would allow the
cell the tumor cell to survive?" And
it's glutamine. It's abundant
everywhere. So, yes, tumor cells can
burn up a little of these other amino
acids, but there's tiny amounts. They'll
go through it like real quick and
there's nothing left for them.
And then we go through the sugars. Yes,
there's a mostly glucose, but but the
sorbol nobody sorbose that's nobody the
sorbose never exists in our body anyway.
Um and then you have a little bit of
uridine.
Yeah, there's a little bit of uridine in
the microenvironment, but again, it's
not going to drive the disregulated
growth of these tumor cells.
So, clearly we've interrogated what the
tumor cells need and then we go in vivo
and we target the glucose and glutamine
simultaneously while the the isn't
These damn tumor cells up and dying.
So, clearly we've worked out the
science. We've worked out a We just
haven't perfected it as effectively as
we would want in the clinic. So, again,
dosage, timing, and scheduling on sexy
science will ultimately be the strategy
perfected for managing cancer in most
people.
Okay, and and the second paper?
was our That was our first paper. So,
that paper
follows up on Warburg's studies. Warburg
did not know about glutamine
fermentation. So, the other thing too is
we showed that tumor cells consume
oxygen avidly, uh but it's not linked to
ATP synthesis through oxidative
phosphorylation. It's used for other
things. Not not that. So, that that led
You if you go into the scientific
literature today, every many many folks
will say Warburg was wrong because tumor
cells consume oxygen. Even Warburg made
the same mistake. He thought oxygen
consumption in tumor cells, which was
low, was still linked to oxidative
phosphorylation. We have shown that is
not the case. There's a disconnect. The
tumor cells are consuming oxygen, but
not for oxidative phosphorylation. It's
significant. Maybe a little bit, but not
not not a lot. So, that was a big
discovery. Um the fact that amino acids
can be fermented in the mitochondria,
the fact that oxygen consumption is not
linked to sufficient ATP synthesis
through oxidative phosphorylation now
clears up all of the mess that Warburg
was struggling with. We also showed that
the amount of lactic acid Warburg
Warburg pigeon pigeonholed himself by
being rigid with his quantifications.
Uh rigid quantification. And we have now
shown that those those uh rigid
quantifications were inaccurate and this
led to a lot of controversy uh about
cancer. Was he correct about the origin
of cancer? Absolutely was he correct. He
just didn't have all of the
the details fleshed out and this led to
an explosion of misinformation and the
the shift of cancer metab over to the
genet the genetics. So, they said, "Oh,
these biochemists don't know what the
hell they're doing." There's a lot of
fights with Warburg and everything. Now,
we see all these mutations. So for the
last 75 years we've been chasing genes.
Uh and the genes are all downstream
epiphenomena of the metabolism of the
cancer cell. That's why we haven't made
any advances in this whole cancer field.
So now we bring the whole train back on
track, clean up the the misunderstanding
that Warburg and others have had, and
now we can move forward with the correct
way to manage cancer in a non-toxic way.
Yes, so that paper then
presents the strongest evidence to say
that there's an amino acid fermentation
driving driving these cancers. And
they're all the same All cancers are the
are very similar. They They have a
damaged mitochondria and they need
glucose and glutamine fermentation to
drive the dysregulated growth. Whether
it's a brain cancer, colon cancer,
breast cancer, melanoma, doesn't make
any difference. They all have the same
problem. So they're all the same. Uh
yeah, NIH says, "Oh no, cancer's 100
different diseases." No, it's not. It's
a single disease, a metabolic problem.
Now the the second major paper, where we
have a lot of other co-authors MDs and
PhDs on this on this paper, uh discusses
how we strategize this whole concept
into the clinic. How How do we How do we
How do we take the basic science of
understanding of the problem and now and
now perfect this for a clinical
application. So that's step two. Step
one is you have rock solid science to
say why we're doing this. Step two is is
manage Now bring it into the clinic and
making it work in clinical trials. But
right now people say, "Oh, I can't
believe it unless you do a clinical
trial." Well, we would love to do a
clinical trial. Problem is nobody's
educated to know how to do this.
Uh
the Dr. Durieux, myself, and a few
others can do it. But the vast majority
have no clue. What I just told you is is
unknown the majority of oncology clinics
anywhere on the planet. So you have to
train
uh physicians. You have to know how to
do this, what I just said. And then you
have to select compliant people. You
just can't grab guys off the street and
say, "Hey, you know, do all this stuff."
He won't know what to do, why he's doing
it. You've got it You've got to get a a
compliant group of people and you have
to follow them. And you have to follow
them and prove unambiguously that this
is the way you're going to manage
cancer. Then all of a sudden it'll
explode and and people will be trained
and everybody will know what and how to
do to the best of their ability. But
this is a work in progress.
But we have the platform. The bedrock is
here. We just have to work
and move this field forward.
Well, hopefully we can get the message
out. Um just a few quick fire questions
to to to end this off if if if that's
all good with you.
Yeah. Um
the the the first is do you believe most
diseases are metabolic in nature?
Um well, I think that's a very good
question.
Uh I think a lot of them are. Uh with
the with the exception of rare inherited
mutations like cystic fibrosis, you
know, um um
Tay-Sachs disease, Huntington's disease,
uh you know, these are gene-driven
causes of of These are called inborn
errors of metabolism and this kind of
thing.
But most chronic diseases absolutely
affect the ability of our cells. They
throw us out of metabolic homeostasis.
Metabolic homeostasis is driven by the
efficiency of the mitochondrial networks
within within our cells.
Um
Uh
Entropy, which is the second law of
thermodynamics, is ultimately leads to
the demise of of all of us. We don't We
don't live forever.
Uh
We We undergo disorder and it's the
disorder that eventually leads to the
shutdown of our entire
physio physiola- physiology.
And um
uh What metabolic therapy does is keeps
mitochondria healthy so that we All we
do is delay the second law of
thermodynamics, which is simply delaying
entropy. Uh eventually uh when we die
and if we die under natural causes, our
entire energy system shuts down over a
very short period of time. Uh our
our network of of main main maintaining
uh ionic gradients across membranes, we
reach equilibrium and when we reach
equilibrium, we're dead. You know,
that's the natural way we die. Uh but by
abusing our our metabolism, we put
ourselves at risk
uh for elevated or increased entropy,
second law, and we die sooner. Or if we
Or if they try to keep us alive, we live
longer in a in a in a very unhealthy
state.
So you'd like to live as long as you
possibly can. And listen, I'm not the
pri- I'm telling people they can't eat
uh
sweets and
and and eat pizza and drink Coca-Cola
and whiskey and beer and all the stuff
that we we enjoy in our lives. But I I
just think we have to be cautious that
uh
chronic abuse of our body will
will Mother Nature will let us know in
no uncertain terms. Uh
and the mitochondrial network will let
us know in no uncertain terms
what what we need to do. But you also
have to realize the body is an
incredible healing machine. If you allow
it to get back on track, you can deal
with a lot of these things. That's why
therapeutic fasting, water-only fasting
was always considered a a way to
you know, reset the the metabolic
thermostat in your body. Uh
So there's a lot of ways we can do this
if we are knowledgeable to know how to
do this. Uh
The pro- The problem is you need to you
need to have this understanding.
Yes, there's a lot of foundational
knowledge needed. So with that in mind,
would um would the press-pulse protocol
be a viable
implementation or lack of a better word,
would it be a viable protocol to
mitigate against other chronic diseases
or help manage other chronic diseases?
Well, I think for for type two diabetes
for sure because there are there's clear
evidence that type two diabetes can be
cured uh with with diet and exercise
alone. You don't need all these other
But of course, people don't want to do
that, so they love to take um
whatever those drugs are that
that make you get get rid of the
diabetes. I don't know what the
long-term consequences of that. Now for
Alzheimer's disease,
you know, I would say 40 to 50% of all
maybe even more Alzheimer's is the
result of
of damage to uh mitochondria in your in
your neurons. The problem of course with
Alzheimer's disease, when your neurons
die, you don't make new neurons. So
you don't regenerate new neurons. And if
you do, they're they're they're blank
slates. There's no memory associated
uh with that. So I I I
you know, again,
Alzheimer's disease could be uh
prevented or delayed for sure. Type two
diabetes could be cured. A lot of
cardiovascular disease could definitely
be eliminated. Uh cancer for sure. Uh
All the chronic diseases have have have
have a linkage to destabilized
energetic homeostasis, which is
basically mitochondrial function.
Okay, well, that's a that's a very
hopeful message. Um
let
One question quickly for me,
last question for me cuz I appreciate
we're going to go over on time.
Is what contrarian belief do you believe
within your field of
mitochondria as a metabolic disease
cancer as a metabolic mitochondria
disease?
What contrarian belief do you believe
that other people in your specific field
would disagree with you on?
Um
well,
I I think we'd have to discuss that
first and find out what part of the
disagreement is is there. Uh like what
what would they disagree about? Because,
you know, the the the work of
of of the late Richard Veech clearly
showed
uh the bioenergetic capacity of the
ketone body uh
and and how and how it it can enhance
mitochondrial function. Um you know, I
mean, the discussion about cancer as a
genetic disease, I think any rational
mind looking at the data would have to
agree that it can't be a genetic disease
based on the information that I gave
you. Uh but, you know, scientific
debates and discussion are absolutely
essential um for fleshing out
disagreements Not only disagreements,
interpretation of data.
Um how you design an experiment and
interpret the data. Because we can have
two We can have the
facts. The facts are This is what
develops theories in the sense of
understanding. It's how you interpret
the facts of the data that you collect
from designed experiments. And and at
first there might be controversy as to
how you interpret the facts.
Uh
but we don't deny the fact. We just We
just have disagreements on how we
interpret the the facts. And that's
that's how science moves forward. We We
have to We have to have a consensus on
how we interpret the facts that we
collect. And that's how we move fields
forward. So there's always a
disagreement, always a disagreement on
how we interpret the facts. But that's
okay. That's normal. That's a normal
process of science and that's how we the
fields move forward
when we all come to a better
understanding of how we interpret the
facts and act upon them. So um but yeah,
I I I mean, I'm I have debates with
people,
discussions with people, and we come to
a consensus. And there's some things
that I I miss myself and I said, "Yeah,
that's a very excellent point. We should
incorporate that and and look more into
it." So that's the way the field moves
forward that way.
Hm, if any people be willing more
willing to change their mind, right?
More more in the spirit of Darwin. Like
kill your best loved ideas when the
facts disagree, right?
Yeah, well, that's I mean, we can all
disagree, but
eventually we come to to realize. I
mean, look at the disagreement that they
had about the geocentric heliocentric
movement of the planets. I mean, for
1,800 years people thought the the the
sun revolved around the earth and the
planets all revolved revolved revolved
around. Copernican idea was not with met
was met with great hostility. So,
it takes time for the field to come to
recognizing the facts of things.
Mhm. Let's see the
Time discovers truth, right? So, very
hopeful. Um Dr. Seyfried, thank you so
much for for that episode. It was really
really wonderful. Before you go, I'd
love to just give you an opportunity to
for where our listeners can find more of
your work. I know your Twitter is good
for keeping up with your papers.
Any other resources which might be
helpful beneficial as well.
Yeah, so that's a very good point. I
don't forget I've written only one book.
Cancer as a metabolic disease. I did not
write these summaries that my name is
attached to.
People should know that. They come out
and they say, "Oh, you know, I read your
summary." I didn't write a summary. They
put my name on these summaries make it
look like I wrote it. I didn't write
that. I only wrote one book by in the
John John Wiley Press. And I apologize
for its high expensive it is. I I try to
tell them, "Please don't make it so
expensive." but they don't listen.
So, they they're a textbook
and they were also a scientific
credibility organization as well. But,
you have to realize another thing.
Our research
is supported predominantly by private
foundations and philanthropy.
We received a very nice
grant from United Kingdom Childhood
Cancer Foundation that helped us develop
therapies for pediatric high-grade
gliomas.
We're very very appreciative
of the UK
for supporting our work in that regard.
And then we have other foundations
Travis foundations of cancer metabolic
treatments supports our work. And then
people make donations directly to my
university Boston College here in in
Boston. And they have a cancer fund
set up so that so that folks that want
to move this field forward as quickly as
possible can make direct donations to
the university. My
there's a place on my website on the on
the biology department where they can go
down and and donate directly to me
through through the university.
So,
and then the university sets up a fund
to support our research based on
philanthropic donations and these other
private foundations that that that
support our work. So, so this is the way
it has to move if you really want to
make the difference. It has to be mostly
philanthropy because the the strategy
that we take is is not well received by
the major granting agencies when you say
it's a metabolic disease and not a not a
genetic disease. They have a tendency to
be a little bit less enthusiastic. But,
but that's okay. It's going to change.
It's going to change.
Just on that, how much funding goes to
the genetic theory of cancer over a year
versus the metabolic theory?
Well, let's let's look at the NIH
the NCI
National Cancer Institute I I think like
$7 billion something like that. I would
say a good 50% of it is going to
chasing genes. So, immunotherapies and
and this kind of stuff all based on the
somatic mutation theory.
So, and it's the same in UK.
It's the same in all these different
countries Germany. They're all they're
all chasing genes. Not all of them but
but that seems to be the strategy. So,
so that that that's one of the one of
the unfortunate things. But, but they'll
they'll all come to know
at some point
that if you want to avoid cancer and
manage it effectively, you're going to
have to use metabolic a metabolic
approach. So, so yeah, we're very we're
very
appreciative of those folks. And the
other thing that I do is if you look at
the papers that we published the the two
papers, you see acknowledgements.
And you say, "Who are all these people?"
in the acknowledgement section. They're
the folks that have given us the money.
The organizations and the folks that
give us money. There are some people,
believe it or not,
that just want to be part of the
movement. And they just want to say, "I
gave this guy money and this look at he
he acknowledged me on the bottom of his
paper." Like you can see who are these
names of people and organizations. Well,
they're the ones who support our
research. And if they'd like us to
acknowledge them, I'd be more than happy
to include their their name as a
supportive of this of this new movement
to manage cancer. So, they can some of
these guys get excited and say, "Oh, I
want to I want to support this. Let me
let me let me give the money to this."
And so you know you're you're giving the
money to the right the right
organization the right the right
approach to managing cancer. That's for
sure.
Wonderful. Well, what we'll do is we'll
put all the links you just described in
the show notes that people can go and
donate if they like to.
We'll put links to your book, we'll put
a link to your Twitter. And
yeah, just from our side thank you so
much. Really it was a real privilege to
sit down with you and learn a lot. So,
thanks for coming on.
Yeah, well, thank you very much. It was
a pleasure.